madhva’s unknown sources: a review
Shrisha Rao ∗ B. N. K. Sharma
(Asiatische Studien L VII, 1, 2003. pp. 181–194)
1 Introduction
The present paper attempts to give an academic response to Roque
Mesquita’s study, Madhva’s Unknown Literary Sources: Some Observations .1
Reviews of the original German version of the above-mentioned text have
appeared in various academic journals (some are brieﬂy cited on the book
jacket itself). Although well-intentioned in their assessments, they miss se-
rious problems in the text reviewed, which we would like to point out here.
Upon an investigation of Madhva’s unknown sources, Mesquita concludes
that Madhva himself is the author of them, and that “we should assume that
all the unknown sources of Madhva are not ‘ﬁnished products’, but merely
‘work-titles’, which Madhva employs as a loop (sic) to hang up his literary
compositions” (p. 175). Madhva commits the fraud in honesty, for he “is
sincerely and ﬁrmly convinced that he was acting on the command of Vis .n. u”
(p. 176). Mesquita has a detailed discussion (pp. 35–62) of the avat¯ ara
doctrine of Madhva, and indicates how Madhva’s claim of being the third
incarnation of V¯ ayu, a god he describes as close to Vis.n. u, is pertinent in this
regard (pp. 63–87).
Mesquita’s monograph upon the subject of Madhva’s unknown sources is
a welcome foray into the subject, just touched upon by previous authors
like Suzanne Siauve (Doctrine de Madhva, Pondicherry, 1968), and B.N.K.
∗Corresponding author.
1
Sharma (History of the Dvaita School of Vedanta, 3d. ed., Motilal Banarsi-
dass, 2000). It however makes factual errors of a type not generally expected
in mature scholarship, and is thus suspect in its core assessments.
The chief diﬃculty with Mesquita’s work is that his research is monumen-
tally incomplete, so he presents a distorted picture that does little to cause
faith in his conclusions. Mesquita is genuinely unfamiliar with the spread
of the Vedic corpora, and in a rush to judgement labels Madhva the author
of rare Vedic (and some post-Vedic) sources for which we have collateral
evidence other than Madhva’s own word; in fact, in a few cases, we even
have evidence of their present-day or recent availability. This evidence for
the existence of many of Madhva’s sources that Mesquita carelessly labels
“ﬁctitious” is damaging to his credibility, to say the least, since it is always a
given that a conclusion is no more sound than the facts upon which it rests.
It is well beyond the scope of the present paper to discuss the question of
the unknown sources in full detail, but here we simply highlight evidences for
a few of the “ﬁctitious” sources (with an emphasis on the ´Sruti sources, which
are thoroughly researched), and also point out other errors in the claims
Mesquita presents as facts. We intend the following solely as a template for
further thorough research, rather than as an exhaustive resource in itself. 2
One improvement in the English version over the original German text
is the availability of indices, so that names, “ﬁctitious” titles, etc., may be
readily cross-referenced with the pertinent pages in the book. Taking this
into account, we do not necessarily cite every instance where an unknown
source is discussed by Mesquita.
2 Some “ﬁctitious” sources
Mesquita (pp. 30–31) cites with apparent approval the list of unfamiliar
sources from Madhva’s BSBh. objected to by Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita (17th cent.),
and proceeds to assume without veriﬁcation that all of them, as well as
others like them, must indeed be unknown. This amounts to putting too
much faith in a medieval traditionalist’s claims, a rather odd thing for a
modern scholar to do. Mesquita also is apparently unaware of the reply
2
to Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita by his M¯ adhva contemporaries Vijay ¯ ındra T ¯ ırtha3 and
N¯ ar¯ ayan. ¯ ac¯ arya,4 whom he completely fails even to mention. The work of
Vijay ¯ ındra has been published.5
Here are some “ﬁctitious” sources of Madhva, and independent evidences
of their reality—
2.1 Pain . gi-´Sruti
In footnote 49 on page 39, and elsewhere, Mesquita calls a ´Sruti text of
Madhva with the label Pain. gi unknown, following Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita. In fact:
1. In the K¯ a´ sik¯ acommentary6 (pp. 192–193) on P¯ an . in ¯ ı’s As.t.¯ adhy¯ ay ¯ ı
4.3.105, we ﬁnd the statement kalpes. u pain. g ¯ ı kalpah. , showing that
this was an important recension with its own Kalpa-s¯ utra. Patanjali’s
Mah¯ abh¯ as.ya on 4.2.66 also refers to the same, and indicates that said
Kalpa-s¯ utra was actually available to him:evamapi pain. g ¯ ıkalpah. atr¯ api
pr¯ apnoti.
2. A manuscript of a Pain . g¯ ayani Br¯ ahman. a is reported by Oppert 7 (p.
22, no. 390) to have been in the possession of one Venkatar¯ ama ´Srauti
of Mullandram. Also see pages 454, 557, and 582, where Oppert notes
other manuscripts. Therefore, in all, Oppert reports a total of four
manuscripts, although there do not seem to be more recent reports of
them (a matter unfortunately not helped by the fact that Oppert’s cat-
alog does not give any accurate contact information on his informants).
3. Pain. gi Gr.hya (further evidence of a robust recension) is quoted by
these8 (pp. 187, et seq.) traditional commentators—Haradatta
on ¯Apastambha Gr.hya 8.21.9, M¯ askar ¯ ı on Gautama Dharmas¯ utra
14.6.17; the Pain . gi Dharmas¯ utra is quoted in the Smr. ticandrik¯ a
(A´ saucakhan. d. a).
4. Pain. gi is counted as one of the ´S¯ akhas of the R . g Veda by the
Prapancahr.daya,9 a pre-R¯ am¯ anuja text, in its second chapter (Veda
Prakaran. a).
3
5. Teachers of the Pain. gi clan are quoted in numerous pre-Madhva texts,
e.g., ´San. kh¯ ayana Br¯ ahman. a 16.9; Patanjali’s S¯ amaved ¯ ıya Nid¯ anas¯ utra
4.7; Br.had¯ aran. yaka Upanis.ad 6.3.10 (Madhuka Pain. gya is mentioned).
6. The Pain. g¯ ayani Br¯ ahman. a is twice quoted in the ¯Apastambha ´Srauta-
s¯ utra (at 5.14.18 and 5.29.4).10
7. There are literally dozens of citations from Pain . gi, Pain. g¯ ayani, and
Pain. gala Br¯ ahman. as which have been collected by Satya Shrava, pp.
45–48,11 and by Ghosh. 12 For brevity, we do not list them all here.
8. A Pain. gi-´Sruti (having an Upanis.adic ﬂavor) is quoted by Sudarshana
S¯ ur ¯ ı (a disciple of R¯ am¯ anuja) in his´Srutaprad ¯ ıpik¯ a, as well as in
the ´Srutaprak¯ a´ sik¯ a in thecatuhs¯ utr ¯ ıportions. These are the same as
that quoted by ´San. kar¯ ac¯ arya in his own commentary13 on the Brahma
S¯ utras, but SS quotes a few more words. Thus, early authors from the
other two Vedantic streams also cite this source.
2.2 Bh¯ allaveya-´Sruti
In footnote 17 on page 21, and elsewhere, Mesquita calls a ´Sruti text of
Madhva with the label Bh¯ allaveya unknown, also following Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita.
In fact:
1. As before, in the K¯ a´ sik¯ acommentary14 on P¯ an. in ¯ ı’s As.t.¯ adhy¯ ay ¯ ı 4.3.105,
we ﬁnd the statement br¯ ahman. es. u t¯ avat—bh¯ allavinah. , referring to a
Br¯ ahman. a text of this recension. The commentary Ny¯ asa shows that
the recension was named after its progenitor Bhallu.
2. According to Ramanatha Dikshitar, 15 manuscripts of the Bh¯ allavi
Br¯ ahman. a of the S¯ ama Veda are still said to exist in North India (p.
207). These need to be traced and published.
3. The Bh¯ allaveya-´Sruti is also quoted by ´San. kara in his BSBh. (3.3.26)
and by his disciple Sure´ svara in his Br.hadv¯ artika (2.4.26).
4
4. Satya Shrava 16 (pp. 66–68) shows that the following pre-Madhva
sources all reference the Bh¯ allaveyas: Ven . kat.am¯ adhava (commen-
tator on several texts of the R . g Veda); Patanjali’s Mah¯ abh¯ as.ya
on 4.2.66 and 4.3.105 (from this context it is clear that a recen-
sion of the SV is implied); N¯ arada´ siks .¯ a 1.13; Jaimin ¯ ıya Br¯ ahman. a
3.125; Jaimin ¯ ıya Upanis.ad Br¯ ahman. a 2.4.7; Upagranthas¯ utra 1.10 of
K¯ aty¯ ayana; Bh¯ as.ikas¯ utra 3.15 of K¯ aty¯ ayana; T¯ an. d. ya Br¯ ahman. a 2.2.4.
5. Ghosh 17 gives citations (pp. 110–111) of “this well-known school of
the S¯ amaveda” from the following: Br .haddevat¯ a 5.21–23 and 5.159,
Dr¯ ahy¯ ayan. a-´ srauta-s¯ utra 3.4.2, Baudh¯ ayana Dharmas¯ utra 1.2.11–12—
and also indicates other places where citations may be found.
2.3 Sauparn . a-´Sruti
In Madhva’s Vis .n. u-Tattva-Vinirn. aya, one ﬁnds a quote labeled iti
sauparn. a´ srutih. . This is, Mesquita thinks, a “loop” for one of Madhva’s own
productions. However, a clue about the origin of this ´Sruti is to be found in
another of Madhva’s own works, the G ¯ ıt¯ a-T¯ atparya-Nirn. aya 2.25, whence he
references a quote with the label, iti r. gvede sauparn. a´ s¯ akh¯ ay¯ am. Accordingly:
1. In the Kashmir Khila Samhit¯ a, the Suparn. a Adhy¯ aya comprises the
whole of Adhy¯ aya 1 of 11 s¯ uktas (79 mantras in all). However, a
manuscript of the Suparn . a Adhy¯ aya having an extent of 214 ´ slokas
(i.e., 214 × 32 syllables) exists in the collection of the Royal Asiatic
Society of Bengal 18 (p. 240, entry 172).
2. In addition, there is one more Suparn . a Adhy¯ aya19 translated into En-
glish.
3. In her work on the khila texts of the R. g Veda, Bhise 20 discusses some
Sauparn. a hymns, and translates them as well.
Our sources indicate that many manuscripts of the Sauparn . a recension of
the R. g Veda still exist in India; these need to be collated and published.
5
2.4 V atsa- ´Sruti
This is a source objected to as ﬁctitious by Appayyad ¯ ıks .ita, and following
him, by Mesquita also. In fact:
1. In the Vis .n. u Pur¯ an. a,21 the recensions of various Vedas are discussed,
and a guru-´ sis. ya parampar¯ ais described from Paila, one of the direct
disciples of Vy¯ asa. There (verse 3.4.22), each of the following ﬁve disci-
ples of Devamitra ´S¯ akalya are mentioned as having received a Samhit¯ a
each of the R V from their Guru: Mudgala, Galava, Vatsa, ´S¯ aliya,´Si´ sira.
These all correspond to Vedic recensions only: a ´Si´ sira´ s¯ akh¯ ais known,
as are the R V Kramap¯ at.ha of B¯ abhravya Galava, and the Mudgala
Upanis.ad. This is strong collateral evidence for the onetime existence
of the Vatsa ´ s¯ akh¯ aalso (remnants may still remain).
2. The Mah¯ abh¯ as.ya of Patanjali 22 at 4.2.104 reads G¯ argakam| V¯ atsakam
| Maudakam | Paippal¯ adakam ... K¯ al¯ apakam, etc.—the other names on
the list are of Vedic recensions: Mauda and Paippal¯ ada of A V, K¯ al¯ apaka
the same as Maitr¯ ayan.¯ ı, G¯ arga of SV—so must ‘Vatsa’ also be.
3. All the versions of the ancient text Caran . avy¯ uha clearly state23 that
Vatsa (also called Paun. d. ravatsa) was a school of the V¯ ajasaney ¯ ı Yajur
Veda.
4. Hem¯ adri (13th cent.) has quoted the Vatsa Gr .hya.24 Once more, the
existence of a Gr.hya is strong evidence for the recension.
5. The Vedavr.ks.a25 mentions a YV ´ s¯ akh¯ anamed Paun. d. ravatsa.
2.5 Other “ﬁctitious” titles
For brevity, we mention just in passing some of the other “ﬁctitious” titles
used by Madhva:
2.5.1 Udd¯ alaka- ´Sruti
Udd¯ alaka the son of Arun. i belonged to the Gautama clan 26 (pp. 187–188),
for which reason he is also called ¯Arun. i. The Prapancahr .daya mentions
6
Gautama as a ´ s¯ akh¯ aof the R V (and also of the SV); an “Udd¯ alaka- ´Sruti”
could come from either source. (Madhva also cites a Gautama- khila in his
G ¯ ıt¯ a Bh¯ as.ya, 10.41.)
2.5.2 Indradyumna- ´Sruti
This is related to the Bh¯ allaveyas, or could even be part of them. For in-
stance, note the following passage from the K¯ an. va ´Satapatha Br¯ ahman. a27:
“2.7.1.16 In that matter, Indradyumna Bh¯ allaveya made [use of]
an anus. t.ubh [verse] as prayer of invitation and a tris. t.ubh [verse] as
the oﬀering prayer, thinking, “Let me thus enclose on both sides
(or let me obtain from both).” He fell down from this chariot.
Having fallen from the chariot, he broke (dislocated) his arm.”
Mention of an Indradyumna Bh¯ allaveya may also be found elsewhere, e.g.,
in the Ch¯ andogya Upanis.ad, 5.14.1.
2.5.3 Agnive´ sya- ´Sruti & Kaun. d. inya-´Sruti
Agnive´ sya and Kaun. d. inya, the progenitors of the recensions bearing their
names, are said to have been disciples of V¯ adh¯ ula, which is a full-ﬂedged
´ s¯ akh¯ anow found in Kerala. The ¯Ananda Samhit¯ a—a Vaikh¯ anasa text, clearly
mentions the Kalpas of these two ´ s¯ akhas. The Tantrav¯ arttika of Kumarila
Bhatta (1.3.11) also mentions the Kaun. d. inya Kalpa. The Pravaramanjar ¯ ı of
Purus.ottama also quotes the Kaun. d. inya ´Srautas¯ utra28 (pp. 237–238).
At this time, the remnants of the Agnive´ syas may be found in the Tanjore
region among the Dikshitar ´Saivites. They use the Taittir ¯ ıya YV, and their
tradition might now be extinct. 29
2.5.4 Pippal¯ ada- ´S¯ akh¯ a
An Atharva Veda recension bearing the name is well known (and has been
published); it, or associated Br¯ ahman. a and such literature, could easily qual-
ify for the name.
The Pippal¯ ada school is also alluded to by the Mah¯ abh¯ as.ya of Patanjali
at 4.2.104 (cited previously) and 4.2.66.
7
2.5.5 Vy¯ asa-Smr.ti
This is not, as Mesquita appears to assume, simply a loose tag applied to
a mixture of some proportion of Pur¯ an . ic sources as well as Madhva’s own
secret compositions, but is an independent dharma´ s¯ astratreatise in its own
name. It is quoted from by ´San. kara under Gaud. ap¯ ada-K¯ arik¯ a 2.31, as well
as by others in many other places. The editors of the Dharmako´ sa series out
of Pune (vol. 1, 1937) state that they have tried to reconstruct this and other
rare Smr.tis from quotations found in various works. P.V. Kane 30 discusses
this source also.
We have heard that the complete Vy¯ asa-Smr .ti is part of a collection of
Smr.ti texts published from Calcutta, but don’t have an exact reference.
2.5.6 Bhavis .yatparva
This is a name given to the last part of the Hari-vam . sa; Mesquita (pp. 62,
fn. 103) adduces no reasons whatsoever for saying that it has “nothing to
do” with that text. (The mere assertion that a quote is not found there
is not suﬃcient—see section 3.) Names at a second level (names for parts
of texts) such as Moks .adharma are used by Madhva. The name can also
refer to the last Parva of the Mah¯ abh¯ arata itself—see the opening remarks
of R¯ aghavendra31 (p. 1) in his G ¯ ıt¯ a-Vivr.ti, where he names the eighteen
Parvas of the Mbh., using this name for the last.
2.5.7 Mah¯ asam. hit¯ a
This is a Pancar¯ atra work also known as the Sanatkum¯ ara Sam . hit¯ a. It
is divided into ﬁve major sections each called a R¯ atra. It has been pub-
lished.32 Unfortunately, all manuscripts the editors could ﬁnd were muti-
lated, so the ﬁnal R¯ atracalled Br.haspati-R¯ atra is missing, as are signiﬁcant
parts of others as well. The colophon, which uses the name Mah¯ a Sam . hit¯ a,
states that the text contains of the order of 10,000 verses (11,000 according
to one manuscript) while the published text has of the order of 6000 verses,
the rest being lost.
8
2.5.8 Laks .an. a´ s¯ astra
An unknown text called a laks. an. a-´ s¯ astraby Madhva is found quoted in his
MBTN, chapter nine. The fragment from which the verse is quoted is found
in two manuscripts, and has been published; its editor surmises that it may
be from the Brahm¯ an. d. a Pur¯ an. a.33
3 “Fictitious” quotes from known works
Mesquita notes that he is unable to ﬁnd quotes given by Madhva from certain
well-known sources, and assumes that this is because Madhva has claimed
that his quotes come from them in order to impart legitimacy. However, we
show by a few examples that no such assumption is called for.
Brieﬂy, we may note that published versions and manuscripts of these
known sources vary widely, and there is generally no editio cum notis vario-
rum for one to use.
3.1 Brahm¯ an. d. a Pur¯ an. a
This is a source quoted from by Madhva quite a number of times, and always,
apparently, with the problem that his quotes are not to be found (Mesquita,
p. 90, fn. 153).
After a study of the major Pur¯ an. as, Banerji 34 says (p. 25):
“None of the many verses from the Brahm¯ an . d. a quoted by
Hem¯ adri (13th cent.) in his Caturvarga-Cint¯ aman . i occurs in
the extant Brahm¯ an. d. a Pur¯ an. a. This naturally raises the sus-
picion that the present Pur¯ an. a is, to a great extent, diﬀerent
from the genuine Brahm¯ an. d. a Pur¯ an. a. The contents of the ex-
tant Brahm¯ an. d. a Pur¯ an. a [also] do not accord well with what is
stated [about them] in the Matsya Pur¯ an. a.”
3.2 Garud . a Pur¯ an. a
This is another source of Madhva that has a similar problem.
9
Even here, Banerji says we have the same diﬃculty 35:
“The contents of the extant Garud. a do not tally with those men-
tioned in the Matsya, Skanda, and Agni [Pur¯ an. as]. Not a single
one of the many verses attributed to the Garud . a by early writ-
ers like Madhv¯ ac¯ arya, Devanabhat.t.a, Hem¯ adri, M¯ adhav¯ ac¯ arya,
´S¯ ulap¯ an. i, etc., is found in the present version. These reasons
warrant the assumption that there was an earlier version of the
Garud. a.”
Similar problems exist with other Pur¯ an. as also—refer Banerji. Mesquita
uses just one published version of each text he refers to, which would cause
problems even in other cases than Madhva’s quotes, because the published
texts do vary signiﬁcantly from one another.
3.3 Mah¯ a Upanis.ad
This is an extant Upanis .ad quoted from by Madhva (and also R¯ am¯ anuja in
his BSBh. on 1.1.1), but none of the quotes said by Madhva to have come
from this source are to be found there.
In this regard, the editors of the Dharmako´ sa series 36 opine (p. 4), based
on their reading of the work itself, that the text presently known as Mah¯ a
Upanis.ad “is collected from the original Mah¯ a Upanis .ad, and the [present]
text is a quotation from the latter.”
4 Arguing for the Authorship of Madhva
Most of the arguments Mesquita oﬀers for the authorship of Madhva are
predicated upon the incorrect assumption that there indeed is no trace of
the sources except Madhva’s own word. Given the evidence we have cited
for the veracity of these sources, his arguments have no basis and may be
summarily discarded. However, just for illustration, we mention a few speciﬁc
errors in Mesquita’s analysis.
10
The claim of Madhva that certain texts called Tattva-viveka, etc., were
authored by Vis.n. u or N¯ ar¯ ayan. a comes from the Vais .n. ava doctrine that all
of the traditional Pancar¯ atra texts were authored by N¯ ar¯ ayan. a:
pan˜ car¯ atrasya kr. tsnasya vakt¯ a (vett¯ a) n¯ ar¯ ayan. ah. (tu bhagav¯ an) svayam
(Mbh. 12.337.63, also quoted by Madhva in the second chapter of his
Mah¯ abh¯ arata-T¯ atparya-Nirn. aya). Whether there were, or are, Pancar¯ atric
texts named Tattva-nirn. aya, etc., and indeed whether any modern scholar
would glibly accept the claim that the entire genre of such texts was authored
by N¯ ar¯ ayan. a are issues to be discussed, of course, but Mesquita is nonetheless
in error for not having raised them, and for having mis-stated Madhva’s
position.
Mesquita claims (pp. 93 et seq.) that Madhva’s commentator Jayat ¯ ırtha
refers to the unknown source “Brahma Tarka” as a “lost work,” vide his
statement at ¯ ıtena prabandhena uktam. However, the phrase at ¯ ıta prabandha
need not necessarily mean “lost text.” It simply means “previous text,”
where the “previous” is anterior in the ﬂow of discussion, rather than in
time. Such usage on the part of Jayat ¯ ırtha 37 is seen in his commentary on
Madhva’s commentary on the ¯I´ s¯ av¯ asya Upanis.ad, verse 15, where he says iti
at ¯ ıtagranthena uktamin reference to verse 6 of that Upanis .ad itself. Madhva
gives the extent of the Brahma Tarka as 5000 verses, etc., in verses 74, et seq.,
of his Anu-Vy¯ akhy¯ ana, in commenting upon which not only does Jayat ¯ ırtha
not state that a “lost” text is being referred to, but argues for why the
Brahma Tarka only, rather than the traditional Ny¯ aya and other texts, must
be accepted by all Ved¯ antins.
5 Madhva’s Critics and Non-Critics
Mesquita is very wrong in his impression that Madhva was criticized for his
unknown sources right from his own time. Even if we accept his suggestion
that Varadaguru and Venkat.an¯ atha were of Madhva’s own time, 38 the fact
remains that neither scholar has referenced Madhva, his doctrine, his works,
or his statements. A random or undirected diatribe about people who use
unknown sources cannot be correlated with Madhva except by a stretch of
11
Mesquita’s ill-founded imagination. The fact remains that the ﬁrst opponent
to clearly accuse Madhva was Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita, who came three centuries
later, and it is also highly signiﬁcant that Appayya oﬀers his criticisms on
his own, with no reference to previous views . It is also signiﬁcant that no fol-
lower of Madhva upto the time of Vijay ¯ ındra T ¯ ırtha felt the need to respond
to the charge, as surely would have been done had it been known before
then. It is not plausible that such a charge made would have been ignored,
since Jayat ¯ ırtha and others were quick to consider and explain other charges
against Madhva.
These issues have already been discussed by Sharma 39 in extenso under the
rubrics ‘Problem of Sources’ (pp. 87–89) and ‘Problem of Untraceable Texts’
(pp. 437–438). Although this material must have been easily available to
him, Mesquita remains unaware, as Sharma notes (p. 632).
As new evidence, we should note that Vy¯ asar¯ aya (1460-1539), who initiated
the polemical battle between Dvaita and Advaita with his Ny¯ ay¯ amr.ta, quotes
some of Madhva’s supposedly “ﬁctitious” sources as authorities in his favor,
and his opponent Madhus¯ udana Saraswat ¯ ı, who did not even refrain from
name-calling during the course of his defense of Advaita, makes no charge
of unknown sources, but instead strives to explain the authorities in his own
side’s favor.
For instance, Vy¯ asar¯ aya quotes a line attributed to the Brahma-Tarka
in the Vis .n. u-tattva-vinirn. aya, in the ﬁrst pariccheda, under the topic
pratyaks. asya j¯ aty¯ a upakram¯ adiny¯ ayai´ sca pr¯ abalyam.40
Note particularly the following:
“pr¯ abalyam¯ agamasyaiva j¯ aty¯ a tes. u tris. u smr. tam” iti tu
vaidik¯ arthavis. ayam |
In response, 41 the Advaitasiddhi says:
tadagr. h ¯ ıtagr¯ ahitvamapi na pr¯ abalye prayojakam ...
—and speciﬁcally concludes with:
pratyuta ¯ agamasyaiva sarvatah. pr¯ abalyam. sm¯ aryate
—“pr¯ abalyam¯ agamasyaiva j¯ aty¯ a tes. u tris. u smr. tam” iti |
12
na ca tad ‘vaidik¯ arthavis. ayam’ iti v¯ acyam. ,
advaitasy¯ api vaidik¯ arthavis. ayatv¯ at∥
Similarly, the Ny¯ ay¯ amr.ta quotes 42 a verse attributed to the Parama- ´Sruti
in the Vis.n. u-tattva-vinirn. aya:
“ahamityeva yo vedyah. sa j ¯ ıva iti k ¯ ırtitah. |
sa duh. kh ¯ ı sa sukh ¯ ı caiva sa p¯ atram. bandhamoks. ayoh. ∥”
iti ´ srutau moks. ¯ anvayokte´ sca|
The Advaitasiddhi response is seen to accept the validity of the quote
oﬀered.43
As such, the conclusions are that the question of unknown sources never
ﬁgured in the Ny¯ ay¯ amr.ta-Advaitasiddhi debate, the locus classicus for the
criticism—and defense—of Madhva, and that criticism of his sources was
not uniformly made from his time on, unlike the impression conveyed by
Mesquita.
6 Conclusion
The bogey of unknown and untraceable quotations was raised against Mad-
hva by disgruntled critics like Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita for the ﬁrst time centuries after
Madhva, and was of only a nuisance value. Appayyad ¯ ıks.ita never contested
the Ny¯ ay¯ amr.ta or Candrik¯ a composed near his own time, though he sur-
vived the demise of their author Vy¯ asat ¯ ırtha by a good 40 years or more.
He thought it wise to leave it to better men like the far-oﬀ Madhus¯ udana
Saraswat ¯ ı who never bothered to raise the issue, possibly because they were
better informed.
It was in sheer frustration that Appayya turned to target Madhva himself
somehow and found the topic of the alleged aprasiddha texts a convenient
weapon with which to discomﬁt and malign the system on minor issues like
the untraceable texts; or Madhva’s alleged departures from Paninian gram-
mar, language, and idiom; or his alleged metrical lapses and so forth. The
attempts had only a nuisance value but even these irrelevant criticisms were
13
repulsed then and there by doughty scholars of Dvaita like Vijay ¯ ındra and
N¯ ar¯ ayan. ¯ ac¯ arya.
Madhva’s disciple Aks.obhya debated with Vidy¯ aran. ya on tattvamasi in a
v¯ adaumpired by the great Ved¯ anta De´ sika and was declared the victor. As
a result, Madhva’s system was given a place in the Sarvadar´ sana San . graha,
which could not have been done if Madhva’s system had only a cart-load of
untraceable texts to show in support.
In the present paper, we have tried to gather pertinent information about
texts alleged to be creations of Madhva’s own fancy. In the absence (in
some cases incidental rather than necessary) of access to the actual texts
themselves, such circumstantial evidence as we have tried to present here
serves the purpose; even in law, circumstantial evidence is acceptable when
direct witnesses are not available. Mesquita, and anyone who cares to agree
with his analysis, would be doing a far better job by investigating matters
for himself as we have done, rather than by blindly agreeing with Appayya
and coming up with ludicrous theories based on false premises.
7 Acknowledgements
Robert Zydenbos drew our attention to Mesquita’s work, and also to the need
for a well-researched academic response. Gerald Penn helped us begin our
work by his partial translation of the German text. A great deal of informa-
tion regarding Vedic sources was given by Vishal Agarwal; some information
on other sources was also provided by Krishna Kadiri and Kesava Tadipa-
tri. Prooﬁng of earlier drafts was undertaken by Arvind Acharya, Kesava
Tadipatri, Nataraj B. V., and Krishna Kadiri.
14
Notes
1Mesquita, Roque: Madhva’s Unknown Literary Sources: Some Observa-
tions. Aditya Prakashan, New Delhi, 2000. 197 pp. (Translation of Madhva
und seine unbekannten literarischen Quellen ). Publications of the De Nobili
Research Library, Volume XXIV. Wien: University of Vienna, Institute of
Indology, 1997. 151 pp.
2The following, which has appeared since the original writing of this pa-
per, may also be of interest: Sharma, B. N. K., My Latest Four Research Pa-
pers, available online from http://www.dvaita.net/pdf/papers/four.pdf.
This booklet contains leads for further research, including the showing that
some strange source names: M¯ ay¯ avaibhava Sam. hit¯ a, Hayagr ¯ ıva Sam. hit¯ a, etc.,
used by Madhva, are titles of available Pancar¯ atra texts or fragments.
3cf. B. N. K. Sharma, “History of the Dvaita School of Ved¯ anta,” 3d. ed.,
2000, pp. 403–404.
4ibid., pp. 437–438.
5Madhvamatamukhabh¯ us.an. a, Gurus¯ arvabhauma Sam. skr.ta Vidy¯ ap ¯ ıt.ha,
Mantralayam, 1994.
6‘K¯ a´ sik¯ a—(A Commentary on P¯ an. in ¯ ı’s As.t.¯ adhy¯ ay ¯ ı) of V¯ amana and
Jay¯ aditya with Ny¯ asa (or K¯ a´ sik¯ a Vivaran. apa˜ njik¯ a) of Jinendrabuddhi and
Padamanjari of Haradatta Mishra with Bh¯ avabodhin ¯ ı—A Hindi exposition’
by Dr. Jaya Shankar Lal Tripathi, Vol.5 (Adhyayas 4.2 - 5.1), Tara Book
Agency, Varanasi, 1988.
7Gustav Oppert; Lists of Sanskrit Manuscripts in Private Libraries of
South India; Vol. 2; Govt. Press; Madras; 1885.
8Datta, Bhagavad and Satya Shrava; Vaidik V¯ a ˙ nmaya k¯ a Itih¯ as, vol. I;
Pranava Prakashan; Delhi; 1978.
9Ganapati´ s¯ astr ¯ ı, T; 1915; Prapancahr.daya; Trivandrum Sanskrit Series,
15
vol. 45; Trivandrum. Reprinted in 1987 by Yudhishthira Mimamsaka (Ra-
malal Kapoor Trust, Bahalagarh, district Sonepat).
10Makoto Fushimi; Br¯ ahman. a passages in ¯Apastambha-´Srautas¯ utra, Elec-
tronic Journal of Vedic Studies (EJVS) 4-1 (1998) p. 11.
11Satya Shrava; A Comprehensive History of Vedic Literature—Br¯ ahman. a
and ¯Aran. yaka Works; Pranava Prakashan; Delhi; 1977.
12Batakrishna Ghosh; Collection of the Fragments of Lost Br¯ ahman . as,
1935; reprinted as Panini Vaidika Granthamala 9: Distributors, Meharchand
Lachhmandas, New Delhi, 1982.
13The Catuh-S¯ utr ¯ ı Bh¯ a´ sya of Madhv¯ ac¯ arya, B.N.K. Sharma, Madras, 1934.
14See footnote 4 above.
15M. Ramanatha Dikshitar: S¯ amas¯ arasarwaswam, Ramayana Printing
Works, Madras, 1972.
16See footnote 11 above.
17See footnote 12 above.
18Mah¯ amahop¯ adhy¯ aya Hariprasad Shastri; A descriptive catalog of San-
skrit manuscripts in the Government collection under the care of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal, Vol. II—Vedic Manuscripts; Asiatic Society of Bengal,
Calcutta; 1923.
19Dange, Sadashiv A.; Divine Hymns and Ancient Thought Ritual and the
Quest for Truth; Navrang; New Delhi; 1995 (vol. II, pp. 292–301).
20The Khila-S¯ uktas of the R. gveda: A Study, Usha R. Bhise, BORI, Poona,
1995. Bhandarkar Oriental Series #27.
21See footnote 8 above.
22ibid., p. 165.
16
23ibid., p. 213.
24ibid., p. 165.
25Witzel, Michael; Materielien zu den vedischen Schulen (I. Ueber die
Caraka-Sakha); Studien zur Indologie und Iranistik, vol. 8/9; 1982/3; pp.
171–240.
26See footnote 8 above.
27Swaminathan, C. R. K¯ an. va´ satapathabr¯ ahman. am, vol. II; Indira Gandhi
National Center for Arts; New Delhi; 1997. Comprises K¯ an . d. a II and III of
the text.
28See footnote 8 above.
29M. Witzel, personal communication.
30‘History of Dharma´ s¯ astra (ancient and medieval religious and civil law)’
by Pandurang Vaman Kane. Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute, Poona,
Volume 1, 1930.
31R¯ aghavendrayatikr.tah. G ¯ ıt¯ arthasan. grahah. (G ¯ ıt¯ avivr.tih. ). Editors
A. R. Panchamukhi, Raja S. Pavamanacharya. Gurus¯ arvabhauma
San. skr.tavidy¯ ap ¯ ıt.ha, R¯ aghavendra Sw¯ am ¯ ı Mat.ha, Mantr¯ alaya, 1995.
32“Sanatkum¯ ara Samhit¯ a of the Pancar¯ atr¯ agama” edited by Pandit V.
Krishnam¯ ach¯ arya (Foreword by Dr. V. Raghavan). The Adyar Library and
Research Centre, Madras, 1969.
33Mah¯ abh¯ aratat¯ atparyanirn. ayah. : ´Sri V¯ adir¯ ajat ¯ ırtha´ sr ¯ ıp¯ adapran.¯ ıtay¯ a
Bh¯ avapraka´ sik¯ akhyavy¯ akhyay¯ a sametah. , ed. V. Prabhanjanacarya, Sri
Vyasa Madhwa Seva Pratisthana: supported by Prof. B. Venkateshacharya
Memorial Trust, Bangalore 1998.
34Studies in the Mah¯ apur¯ an. as. Sures Chandra Banerji, Punthi Pustak,
Calcutta, 1991.
17
35ibid., p. 30
36Dharmako´ sa, Upanis.atk¯ an. d. a, vol. 2, part 2, Pune, 1949.
37See the publication of the ¯I´ s¯ av¯ asya with commentaries available online
from http://www.dvaita.net (ISBN 0-9703421-2-8).
38We do not in fact accept this, noting that Mesquita confounds the 17th-
century Venkatan¯ atha, who was a critic of Madhva, with the 13th-century
Ved¯ anta De´ sika, who was not. This issue and related ones are discussed at
length elsewhere; see footnote 2 above.
39B.N.K. Sharma; see footnote 2.
40Number 20, page 276, Volume 1, Ny¯ ay¯ amr.ta-Advaitasiddhi with com-
mentaries. Dvaita Vedanta Studies and Research Foundation, Bangalore,
1994.
41ibid., p. 279.
42DVSRF edition, Vol. 2, Number 33, page 490.
43ibid., p. 498.
18